---
layout: page
title: About
---

## What is this?

tl;dr This is where I'll post some of my writing, mostly based around criticism
and critical thinking.

I started keeping a journal regularly for non-school purposes my senior year in
high school. I did this for a variety of reasons: I thought it would improve my
writing, and I had read that it was ["good for you"][lh_journaling_benefits].

This is not my journal.

... but at that point I set a precedent for writing regularly. The summer after
my senior year in high school I started writing about movies I had seen, because
I realized I had a terrible memory for movies, and thought it would be useful to
to be to read what I had once thought about them after I inevitably forgot that
I watched them.

This was my introduction to criticism. I initially just wrote a few sentences
about the movies. My early thoughts were things like "It was good movie and I
liked it." Over time, my critiques developed, and I began to expand beyond film
into writing about books. I also became more interested in critical thinking,
and evaluating claims logically and rationally.

At this point (end of 2015), I feel like I've developed my writing enough that
I'd like to start circulating it more widely, so I've taken the full plunge and
decided to post it completely in public on the Internet. Make no mistake, I am
not qualified be any sort of critic, but I believe my views can be at least
unique, and I hope one day, insightful.

## About me

I grew up in Massachusetts, went to school at the University of Michigan, and
now I work in the bay area as a software
["engineer"][programmers_arent_engineers].

## About this blog

It's built on [Jekyll][jekyll], it's hosted with [Github pages][github_pages].

[lh_journaling_benefits]: http://lifehacker.com/why-you-should-keep-a-journal-and-how-to-start-yours-1547057185
[jekyll]: https://jekyllrb.com/
[github_pages]: https://pages.github.com/
[programmers_arent_engineers]: http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2015/11/programmers-should-not-call-themselves-engineers/414271/
