---
layout: post
title: This Ain't Your Professor's History
subtitle: A review of _American Nations_ by comparison with _Albion's Seed_
image: /media/american_nations/cover.png
image_title: "The covers of American Nations and Albion's Seed."
description: "A review of Colin Woodard's book _American Nations_, released
2011."
tags:
  - criticism
  - book
---

In a class [my friend](http://joebiglin.com/) took in college, he had to think
of five labels to describe himself. When my friend gave his labels, his
professor asked why he didn't include "American" as one of them. Intrigued by
this exercise, I too, found that "American" was not really a way in which I
thought of myself (though my views have evolved on this topic since I started
working with many colleagues not from the U.S.). I thought about it off and on
for a few years, trying to understand why it didn't feel right.

_Albion's Seed_, historian David Hackett Fischer's 1989 treatise on four Anglo
migrations to the New World in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, which
he asserts determined much of American culture over the next several centuries,
gave me an answer. Fischer identifies four "folkways", patterns of culture
associated with specific populations that settled in the present day U.S.: those
of the Puritans settling in Massachusetts, Cavaliers in the Tidewater region,
Quakers settling in the Delaware Valley, and Borderlanders settling in the
Appalachian backcountry. Many of the attributes being "American" connotes to me:
love of guns, hate of government, strong suspicion of elites and academics,
originated from the Borderlanders, who emigrated via Ireland from the violent
border between England and Scotland to the New World.

On the other hand, Puritan folkways: high regard for education, "improving the
time" through hard work, even institutions of local administration: town
meetings and selectmen, resonated much more strongly with me (my hometown is
mentioned in a footnote).

America has never been a homogenous culture, _Albion's Seed_ shows, rather, an
uneasy compromise between several. Despite _Albion's Seed_'s extremely thorough
treatment of early Anglo-American cultures, Fischer treads lightly on the
several centuries since, though his final hundred pages do include a case study
of the presidency through the lens of his four folkways.

Anxious for more, I turned to a newer book. Colin Woodard's _American Nations_,
published in 2011, incorporates seven new ethnoregional nations—Woodard's
equivalent of Fischer's folkways—with the original four rebranded respectively
as "Yankee", "Tidewater", "Midlands", and "Greater Appalachia". _American
Nations_ focuses more on the evolution of the cultures and updates _Albion's
Seed_ for the twenty-first century.

Or it attempts to. While both _Albion's Seed_ and _American Nations_ discuss
ethnoregional cultures in North America, the similarities end there. _American
Nations_ is not at all like _Albion's Seed_: not in style, not in substance, and
not in attitude. Fischer's work is intellectually stimulating and fun to read,
due to his thorough research and incisive prose. Woodard's work could not be
farther from this; it is intellectually dishonest and upsetting to read: polemic
demagoguery in a cultural history's clothing.

![A map of the America's ethnoregional nations according to Colin
Woodard][woodard_nations_map]

The American nations according to Colin Woodard.

## Malcolm Gladwell Writes History

These are harsh words, and perhaps ones that are not entirely fair. Fischer is a
professor of history at Brandeis University, while Woodard is a reporter, but
considers himself "a historian" (Woodard backflap). Regardless of Woodard's
self-identified profession, one doesn't need to read far into _American Nations_
before realizing that there's a difference between the way a professor of
history and a self-identified historian do history. Consider the motivation of
_Albion's Seed_:

  > The problem is to explain the origins and stability of a social system which
  > for two centuries has remained stubbornly democratic in its politics,
  > capitalist in its economy, libertarian in its laws, individualist in its
  > society and pluralist in its culture. (Fischer 4)

And its thesis:

  > That is the central thesis of this book: the legacy of four British folkways
  > in early America remains the most powerful determinant of a voluntary
  > society in the United States today. (Fischer 4)

On the other hand, Colin Woodard's thesis betrays his popular ambitions:

  > This book aims to see them [America's ethnoregional nations] finally
  > delivered into popular consciousness. (Woodard 15)

This difference in purpose reflects itself in prose as well; Woodard tries to be
more casual. He uses less intrusive endnotes instead of footnotes, [Zagat-style]
quotation soups instead of block quotes, and casual constructions like "So how
does all of this relate to El Norte?" (Woodard 27) or the jarring introduction
to chapter 13: "If you're an American, have you ever really asked yourself why
Canada exists?" (Woodard 150)

Fischer assumes a slightly more educated reader with more knowledge of U.S.
history. In his "Cavaliers" section, Fischer makes references to [Bacon's
Rebellion][wiki_bacons_rebellion] without ever giving much background on the
event. Woodard, on the other hand, precedes a discussion of the cultural
significance of the [Texas Revolution][wiki_texas_revolution] with a brief
recap.

It is a little surprising that Woodard is the one who is including more
information about political events, considering that his book is nearly three
times shorter than Fischer's and covers nearly three times as many ethnoregional
cultures (four vs. eleven). Spreading a book this thin has costs: concreteness
and nuance.

## A Man with a Watch Knows What Time It Is, A Man with Two Watches is Never Sure

At the beginning of _Albion's Seed_, Fischer discusses how he'll make his
argument:

  > If these folkways are to be described truly, they must be described
  > empirically—that is, by reference to evidence which can be verified or
  > falsified. In this work, descriptive examples are presented in the text for
  > illustrative purposes, and empirical indicators are summarized in the notes.
  > (Fischer 11)

It's not fair to expect Woodard to include empirical measurements of culture as
Fischer does; Fischer writes mostly a work on a snapshot of American culture
with some politics thrown in at the end, while Woodard's main motivation is the
evolution of these cultures as a tool to explain political events. That said,
including "descriptive examples" is helpful both pedagogically and in terms of
adding color to what might otherwise be a dry text. Consider how much this one
anecdote from _Albion's Seed_ says about religion and culture in the Appalachian
backcountry:

  > One family of Scottish Presbyterians told him [Anglican missionary Charles
  > Woodmason] plainly that "they wanted no damn black gown sons of bitches
  > among them," and threatened to use him as a backlog in their fireplace.
  > (Fischer 703)

Illustrative examples do not seem to occur with quite the same frequency in
_American Nations_, perhaps victims of page count. Lack of color be damned,
though, the general argument of the book should hold up regardless of the
examples it presents. I'm not convinced this is the case either. Some passages
when considered together are confusing, because they seem to indicate
incompatible conclusions. Woodard discusses the founding of the Left Coast:

  > The [left] coast blended the moral, intellectual, and utopian impulses of a
  > Yankee elite with the self-sufficient individualism of its Appalachian and
  > immigrant majority. the culture that formed—idealistic but
  > individualistic—was unlike that of the gold-digging lands in the interior
  > but very similar to those in western Oregon and Washington. (Woodard 223)

This seems reasonable and in line with the popular conception of the Left Coast.
At the beginning, though, Woodard discusses the importance of founding groups on
culture:

  > Wilbur Zelinsky of Pennsylvania State University formulated the key theory
  > in 1973, which he called the Doctrine of First Effective Settlement.
  > "Whenever an empty territory undergoes settlement, or an earlier population
  > is dislodged by invaders, the specific characteristics of the first group
  > able to effect a viable, self-perpetuating society are of crucial
  > significance for the later social and cultural geography of the area, no
  > matter how tiny the initial band of settlers may have been," Zelinsky wrote.
  > "Thus, in terms of lasting impact, the activities of a few hundred, or even
  > a few score, initial colonizers can mean much more for the cultural
  > geography of a place than the contributions of tens of thousands of new
  > immigrants a few generations later." (Woodard 16)

There's a bit of a mismatch here: the Left Coast combined cultures vs. cultures
are determined entirely by founding groups. These statements could be made
compatible: We can say that the Yankees and Greater Appalachian/immigrant
peoples formed one group whose culture determined that of the Left Coast's.
That's not really the argument that Woodard is making though, he's saying that
two separate groups kept their individual cultures but it resulted in some sort
of hybrid culture. This isn't necessarily wrong, but oversteps the preconditions
of Zelinsky's conjecture and therefore requires additional justification, which
Woodard does not provide.

A particularly egregious contradiction concerns Yankee behavior in the early
nineteenth century. First, during the presidency of John Adams:

  > All citizens had the right to elect their own representatives, the [Yankee]
  > thinking went, but once they did, they owed them their absolute
  > deference—not just to the laws they passed but to everything they said or
  > did while in office. If they disapproved, they were to keep quiet until the
  > next election, when they could vote in another candidate. "The government
  > ought, especially in great measures, to be [sure] of the harmonious and
  > cheerful cooperation of its citizens," Yale president Timothy Dwight
  > explained in a 1798 sermon. (Woodard 163)

Six pages and sixteen years later, we learn that the Yankees have apparently
decided that rule doesn't apply when Virginians are in power:

  > Yankee frustration culminated with a convention of New England leaders held
  > in Hartford in December 1814. In the run-up to the meeting, John Lowell,
  > scion of one of the region's most powerful families, called for delegates to
  > draft a new federal constitution and offer membership only to the original
  > thirteen states. The Revolutionary Era alliance would be restored on Yankee
  > terms, and the uncouth Borderlander-settled territories beyond the mountains
  > would be allowed to join Great Britain. … Standing on the brink, the
  > conventioneers themselves pulled back. After a series of secret meetings,
  > they emerged with a list of proposed constitutional amendments to initiate
  > negotiations with the federal government. (Woodard 169)

I'm not claiming the Yankees' inconsistent and seemingly hypocritical behavior
is Woodard's fault, but it seems odd that he doesn't even acknowledge this
complete reversal in Yankee political etiquette. Instead of learning something
about Yankee culture, I now am not sure what lesson I can take from the
combination of these two passages.

This lack of nuance and justification plagues _American Nations_. Woodard writes
about the three major waves of immigrants to the U.S.:

  > It's not difficult to understand why immigrants avoided the three southern
  > nations. Most were fleeing countries with repressive feudal systems
  > controlled by entrenched aristocracies; until 1866 the Deep South and
  > Tidewater were repressive, near-feudal systems with entrenched
  > aristocracies, and after Reconstruction ended in 1877 they returned to form.
  > (Woodard 256)

I could make the opposite argument: Immigrants from repressive feudal societies
might like the southern nations because they were more like home, but not so
harsh. Admittedly, this is a weak argument, but no less speculative than
Woodard's. Here, and throughout _American Nations_, Woodard diverges from
Fischer, who supplements his points with empirical evidence and includes quotes
from primary sources as anecdata. See [Appendix A][appendix_a] for more examples
of passages from _American Nations_ lacking concreteness and nuance.

## Those who do not learn from history …

Perhaps it's not the job of the popular author to reconcile all the details of
history, but more to extract the gist from it: to take works from historians
like Fischer, update them, and distill them into a more digestible form. This
seems mostly consistent with Woodard's approach in _American Nations_. He
certainly takes and cites important ideas from _Albion's Seed_:

  > As one scholar would later put it: "The South was not founded to create
  > slavery; slavery was recruited to perpetuate the South." (388) (Woodard 56)

And sometimes takes ideas from it without citation (emphasis mine on terms from
_Albion's Seed_):

  > The new constitution trespassed on the **Borderlanders**' belief in
  > **natural liberty** and overturned the radical 1776 constitution they'd
  > forced on Pennsylvania. (Woodard 158)

Woodard also demonstrates he wants to update _Albion's Seed_ by acknowledging
the criticism it's attracted:

  > Fischer's focus is on demonstrating the continuities between specific
  > regional cultures in the British Isles and their North American splinters, a
  > thesis that's taken some knocks from other academics. (Woodard 323)

And he does succeed in addressing some of these critiques. By taking a
temporally longer view of the ethnoregional nations, he can address how they
reacted to various events, and not fall into Fischer's self-set trap of "Culture
is dynamic, ever changing, Fischer insists, but at the same time old ways
persist." identified by [Darrett Rutman writing in _The American Historical
Review_][darrett_rutman].

Woodard also includes more colonial cultures, specifically, the Deep South as
distinct from Tidewater, the New France culture around New Orleans and in modern
day Quebec, and the New Amsterdam culture in present day New York City. He also
discusses some of the first settlers of the New World "going wild" and living
with the Native Americans in modern day Quebec as a result of their influence.
Perhaps this is a response to the critique from the late Charles Joyner, who
[laments in _The Journal of American Folklore_][charles_joyner]:

  > … _Albion's Seed_ devotes only two pages to immigration and race (pp.
  > 810-812) and not quite three pages to other colonial cultures (pp. 816-819)
  > … _Albion's Seed_ purports to explain the origins of American culture and
  > "the determinants of a voluntary society," without acknowledging much
  > influence from either Native American residents or from African or
  > continental European immigrants.

_American Nations_ still falls short of fully addressing Dr. Joyner's critique,
though, due to a hole the size of the United States' black population. Woodard
is not really sure how to treat black Americans' distinct culture. When Woodard
discusses the counterculture movement of the 1960s, he acknowledges its cultural
origins:

  > Combining the utopia-seeking moral impulses of secularized Puritanism, the
  > intellectual freedom of New Netherland, and the tolerant pacifism of the
  > Midlands, the social movement [of the 1960s] sought to remake and improve
  > the world by breaking down the very sorts of traditional institutions and
  > social taboos Dixie whites were fighting to protect. (Woodard 279)

Contrast this with his lack of discussion of the cultural origins of the Civil
Rights movement, led by African Americans that do not fit neatly into Woodard's
eleven nations:

  > African Americans in the Deep South led the movement, challenging apartheid
  > policies across the region: … The majority of the movement's most famous
  > figures were Deep Southerners, including the Reverend Martin Luther King Jr.
  > (from Atlanta) … (Woodard 275)

Breakdown of the cultures themselves may compound this issue. Jonathan Steplyk
[identifies][jonathan_steplyk] this issue in _Albion's Seed_:

  > Among the few flaws in _Albion's Seed_ is that Fisher [_sic_] succumbs to
  > the temptation of overextending how far his thesis can be stretched in its
  > application to American history as a whole.

While _American Nations_ does take a less rigid stance than _Albion's Seed_ and
acknowledges major shifts in the culture, we start to see its logic
overstretched as time progresses as well:

  > During the 1930s the [U.S.] federation was divided on the necessity of
  > preparing for war. New Netherland congressmen were hawkish on military
  > preparations, perhaps because so many of their constituents had emigrated
  > from countries endangered by Hitler. Their Left Coast, Far West, and El
  > Norte colleagues followed suit, especially as the federal government began
  > situating war industries and military bases in the region. Midlanders
  > generally opposed these measures, in part due to the German Americans'
  > reluctance to go to war with their former countrymen. Opinion in Yankeedom
  > was deeply divided, with the New England core more inclined to prepare for
  > war than the Great Lakes and Yankee midwest. (Woodard 290)

It's hard to see here how the founding characteristics of the ethnoregional
nations explain their spectrum of opinions toward joining World War II; rather,
it seems like they were more influenced by demographics at the time. Woodard's
reasoning does not rely on deep-seated cultural tradition.

And yet even these issues are not enough to justify the harsh words I levelled
at _American Nations_ at the beginning of this review. Something else needs to
give.

## [I Can Tolerate Anything Except the Outgroup][ssc_outgroup]

Despite not having read Fischer's book _Historians' Fallacies_, Wikipedia's
paraphrasing of his views on the fallacy of [presentism][wiki_presentism]—the
"anachronistic introduction of present-day ideas and perspectives into
depictions or interpretations of the past"—elucidate the motivation behind many
passages of _Albion's Seed_, where he seeks out not just the behavior of a
particular group, but why that behavior exists. The Puritans didn't just
cultivate "an attitude of respect for the old", they venerated their elders
because "'If any man is favored with long life,' wrote Increase Mather, 'it is
God who has lengthened his days.'" (Fischer 103). Age was a sign of election
consistent with "The Calvinist doctrine of limited atonement—that Jesus died
only for the elect…" (Fischer 104). Fischer also seeks causes for cultural
phenomena when he writes about "gender ways" among the Cavaliers:

  > In the Chesapeake … adulterous women were punished more harshly than
  > adulterous men. For that offense, women were flogged severely or dragged
  > through the water behind a boat until they nearly drowned. Men were treated
  > leniently.
  >
  > This difference was not the result of a mindless or instinctive sexism. It
  > rested upon the assumption that the bloodline within a family was threatened
  > by a wife's adultery, but not by the husband's. (Fischer 299)

Due to Fischer's dedication to seeking out the root of what seem like strange
and unfair cultural behaviors, I finished _Albion's Seed_ with an understanding
that it's difficult to give any productive criticism to a culture without
understanding its own weird internal consistency with its past and present.

Colin Woodard did not get this message from _Albion's Seed_.

For every place where Fischer methodically deconstructs folkways to reveal their
motivation and connection to the past, Woodard casts aspersions on cultures he
dislikes. Which cultures does he dislike? It's not hard to tell, even reasoning
_a priori_:

  > Our country's famed mobility—and the transportations and communications
  > technology that foster it—has been reinforcing, not dissolving, the
  > differences between the nations. … As Americans sort themselves into
  > like-minded communities, they're also sorting themselves into like-minded
  > nations. (Woodard 17)

  > Colin Woodard … lives in Portland, Maine. (Woodard, back flap)

It takes Woodard nearly 200 pages, but presentism begins with the least favorite
president of nearly every Yankee, Andrew Jackson:

  > Regarding the Cherokee, he [Jackson] would soon demonstrate contempt for the
  > Constitution he had just sworn to uphold. …
  >
  > He [Jackson] then drafted and put forward the obscene Indian Removal Bill, a
  > measure to ethnically cleanse the Cherokee and neighboring nations and to
  > relocate them a thousand miles to the west to the arid plains of Oklahoma.
  > (Woodard 196)

In terms of showing contempt for the constitution, Woodard's decision to single
out the president who is considered backcountry elite without mention of, e.g.
Lincoln's unconstitutional suspension of habeas corpus without Congressional
approval during the Civil War, combined with his use of "obscene" here signals
here that he is a good, pious, backcountry settler-hating Yankee. And it's not
just the backcountry, Woodard makes it clear that there's really nothing good
about Dixie culture:

  > The extreme steps they [members of the Dixie bloc] took to defend their "way
  > of life" [during the Civil Rights integration efforts] laid bare the
  > inhuman, despotic nature of the region's cherished practices. (Woodard 276)

And lest he forget, the Far West is also riddled with hypocrisy:

  > The cartels have since made a comeback, in large part by backing political
  > candidates who serve their interests while attacking the Far Westerners'
  > other historic enemy: the federal government. Where the government was
  > concerned, the popular majority long ago developed a concise agenda: get
  > out, leave us alone, and give us more money. They want dams maintained on
  > the upper Columbia but no regulations protecting salmon. They want
  > Washington to keep providing $2 billion in irrigation subsidies but not try
  > to prevent them being used to exhaust the last of the region's great ancient
  > aquifers. (Woodard 252)

Towards the end of the book, Woodard starts to fantasize about how the U.S.
could be if the Dixie bloc were just gone when he discusses the differences
between Canada and the United States:

  > But what has really made Canada fundamentally different from the United
  > States is that four Anglo nations squared off not against an authoritarian,
  > white supremacist Dixie bloc but rather an extremely open-minded, socially
  > relaxed, socialist-minded society [New France] founded on unusually
  > enlightened ideas about race and multiculturalism. (Woodard 312)

At this point, Woodard has basically laid all his cards on the table, but to
make it even more clear, he points to several things that could ruin the Union,
none of which are clearly attributable to Yankee culture and many of which are
conveniently aspects he has ascribed to the Dixie bloc:

  > But one thing is certain: if Americans seriously want the United States to
  > continue to exist in something like its current form, they had best respect
  > the fundamental tenets of our unlikely union. It cannot survive if we end
  > the separation of church and state or institute the Baptist equivalent of
  > Sharia law. We won't hold together if presidents appoint political
  > ideologues to the Justice Department or the Supreme Court of the United
  > States, or if party loyalists try to win elections by trying to stop people
  > from voting rather than winning them over with their ideas. The union can't
  > function if national coalitions continue to use House and Senate rules to
  > prevent important issues from being debated in the open because members know
  > their positions wouldn't withstand public scrutiny. (Woodard 318)

Woodard's final passages in the book (see [Appendix B][appendix_b]) read like a
love letter to the "First Nation" of Native Americans in Canada, who live in an
"environmentally-conscious, communalistic, female-dominated society" (Woodard
321). He unironically includes the following quote:

  > "It's a natural thing for a population to run their own country," says the
  > island's [Greenland's] foreign minister, Aleqa Hammond. "We don't think like
  > Europeans, we don't look like Europeans, and we're not from Europe. It's not
  > that we have bad feelings about Denmark, but it's a natural thing for a
  > population with its own race and identity to want to cut its strings to
  > foreign rule." (Woodard 320)

I'm sure he'd be able to explain why the same concept did not apply to the South
during the Civil War, despite their similar claims of being a different
population due to their Norman ancestry vs. the Anglo-Saxon heritage of the
North, ironically, a fact I learned from _American Nations_.

## Conclusion: Bones to Pick

I was severely misguided when I went into _American Nations_ thinking I would
get another _Albion's Seed_. Even the math doesn't work; if Woodard spent all of
_American Nations_ just discussing the aspects of the eleven cultures he
identifies, he would spend 320 / 11 = 30 pages on each, significantly less than
Fischer's average of 784 / 4 = 196 each. This has a cost in loss of nuance in my
understanding of cultures; I can really only give a single distinguishing
feature of one culture vs. another (e.g. Tidewater emphasized honorable
authority, the Deep South emphasized authority). Other differences are a wash.

To be fair, having some ability to distinguish one culture from another at a
surface level is an acceptable goal for a book written with a popular audience
in mind. _American Nations_ does present some other sticking ideas as well: the
dichotomy between the private Protestantism of the Dixie bloc vs. the public
Protestantism of the Northern Alliance, the fact that most ethnoregional nations
(besides the Yankees) wanted to let the South secede before its attack on Fort
Sumter, and attribution of various American platitudes to specific ethnoregional
nations (e.g. "melting pot" refers to the Yankee tendency to use schools as
vehicles of assimilation for children of immigrants).

My complaints still stand: _American Nations_ does not emulate _Albion's Seed_
in style, lacks _Albion's Seeds_'s nuance, and doesn't even sufficiently address
critiques of _Albion's Seed_. That said, the fact that _American Nations_ isn't
_American Plantations_—the vaporware successor to _Albion's Seed_—does not make
it a bad book.

It's not a bad book either because Woodard has a bone to pick. Fischer has his
own bone to pick: He rails against materialists who wish to downplay culture's
importance throughout _Albion's Seed_, and historical revisionists who wish to
reinterpret cultures in a modern context. On reinterpreting the culture of the
Delaware Valley:

  > The culture of the Delaware Valley was dominated by British Quakers and
  > German Pietists whose Christian beliefs had a special moral character. Here
  > again, their culture has been distorted by historical revisionists who have
  > variously "reinterpreted" them as utopian cranks, manipulative materialists,
  > secular pluralists and the "first modern Americans." The modernity of the
  > Delaware Valley has been much exaggerated, and the primitive Christian roots
  > of William Penn's "holy experiment" have too often been forgotten. (Fischer
  > 788)

The difference, though, and the reason that _American Nations_ is a bad book, is
that Fischer's rant against interpretations of the folkways he describes is well
within the scope of his argument. Woodard's condemnation of the entire Dixie
bloc falls completely outside what a book that claims to be about delivering
North America's ethnoregional nations "into popular consciousness."

The point here is not that I disagree with Woodard. While I'm still not sure if
"American" is one of the top five labels I'd use to describe myself, "Yankee"
is—I tend to hold the same values as Woodard does and thus agree that from a
modern perspective, many of the things he condemns are bad. My issue is that
_American Nations_ masquerades, rather than serves, as a cultural history of the
United States, peddling Woodard's ideology with surface-level justifications
instead of attempting to explain to us the context in which people operated so
we can at least better understand them and their decisions, even if we still
disagree.

This kind of rhetoric is dangerous. Instead of fostering an understanding of
cultures that play an important role in determining the political and social
trajectory of the United States, Woodard implicitly insists that their values
are obviously wrong. Not only is this immature and close-minded, it's
counterproductive: how can we possibly hope to change cultures for the better if
we don't understand their beliefs?

And what if Woodard is wrong? Fischer's inspiration for writing about the
fallacy of presentism is "Whig history", a name given to the history written by
eighteenth and nineteenth century British historians that validated their
beliefs. Is Woodard so sure that his beliefs are correct? On private schools in
the South:

  > Many of the private academies whites set up to avoid attending school with
  > blacks were transformed into Christian academies providing "faith-based"
  > education, with an emphasis on conservative values, creationism, and
  > obedience to authority. (The financial burdens these schools place on
  > less-affluent whites prompted evangelical leaders to embrace taxpayer
  > support of these institutions via "school vouchers.") (Woodard 278)

Woodard condemns school vouchers by association with the Dixie bloc,
[but economists leaned positive on whether school vouchers would make most
students better off shortly after _American Nations_ was
published][igm_school_vouchers] (5% strongly agree, 39% agree, 34% neutral, 5%
disagree, 2% no opinion). Here we have another way _American Nations_ is bad:
not only does it promote a demonization of an "other", it gives sloppy,
unresearched opinions on policy.

If Woodard's book were largely ignored, then I would feel content writing this
review just as a piece for me to vent into the void. Unfortunately, this has
been one of the most sought-after books I've ever tried to check out from the
San Francisco Public Library, which gives this review a little more relevance.

![Availability of _American Nations_ at the San Francisco Public Library. Shows
"All copies in use. Holds: 6 on 7 copies"][sfpl_american_nations]

![Availability of _Albion's Seed_ at the San Francisco Public Library. Shows
"Available in some locations"][sfpl_albions_seed]

(as of 2017-07-10)

There's clearly an appetite for a cultural history of the United States, I just
hope the readers of _American Nations_ also read something—anything—else. I know
a book by David Hackett Fischer that might interest them.

## Works Cited

In case it wasn't clear …

* David Hackett Fischer: _Albion's Seed: Four British folkways in America_.
  (1989)
* Colin Woodard: _American Nations: a History of Eleven Rival Regional Cultures
  of North America_. (2011)

## Appendix A: More missing details in _American Nations_

I didn't include all the passages I found confusing or lacking detail or context
that I wanted to in this review for length considerations. Here are some more
from my notes.

---

  > Within New Spain—and later, Mexico—the people of El Norte were seen as being
  > more adaptable, self-sufficient, hard-working, aggressive, and intolerant of
  > tyranny. (Woodard 31)

Were these perceptions true? Why were Norteños intolerant of tyranny?

---

  > By the eve of the American Revolution, per capita wealth in the Charleston
  > area would reach a dizzying £2,338, more than quadruple that of Tidewater
  > and almost six times higher than that of either New York or Philadelphia.
  > The vast majority of this wealth was concentrated in the hands of South
  > Carolina's ruling families, who controlled most of the land, trade, and
  > slaves. (Woodard 85)

Fischer includes [Gini ratios](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gini_coefficient)
as empirical evidence of material inequalities for the four folkways he
discusses in _Albion's Seed_. Lack of one here robs this passage of an important
empirical check.

---

  > Destitute and land hungry, the vast majority were indeed happy to move
  > straight to the backcountry, where they seized, in the words of a senior
  > colonial official, "any sort of vacant land they can find without asking
  > questions." Some had a little money left from their passage and could have
  > rented land in settled areas closer to Philadelphia but chose not to. As one
  > explained: "we have been, before we came here, so much oppressed and
  > harassed by under landlords in our own country, from which we with great
  > losses, dangers, and difficulties came [to] … this foreign world [to be]
  > freed from such oppression." The Scots-Irish, who came in extended families,
  > traveled for days on narrow Indian paths in search of vacant land in the
  > forested hills of what is now south-central Pennsylvania. (Woodard 103)

Seems to contradict:

  > Borderlanders tolerated enormous inequalities within their communities. In
  > many areas, the wealthiest tenth of the population controlled the majority
  > of the land while the bottom half had none at all and survived as tenants or
  > squatters. (Woodard 105)

---

  > The province of Acadia couldn't participate in any rebellion because the
  > British had wiped it clean off the map and cleansed most of its Francophone
  > population at the start of the Seven Years' War. (Thousands of these
  > displaced people wound up in the swamps of southern Louisiana, which was
  > still controlled by France at the time; to this day, these Cajuns retain key
  > cultural characteristics of New France.) (Woodard 151)

How did they get there? It's not exactly close.

---

  > President James Madison's declaration of war against Great Britain in the spring
  > of 1812 finally pushed Yankeedom over the edge. Having effectively allied the
  > federation with Napoleon, the Southerners had, in New England's view, completed
  > their betrayal of the revolution and revealed their devotion to tyrannical
  > empires. Massachusetts governor Caleb Strong immediately proclaimed a day of
  > public fasting to atone for a war "against the nation from which we are
  > descended, and which for many generations has been the bulwark of our religion."
  > (Woodard 168)

Seems to contradict:

  > Nowhere in British America was rebellion more universally supported than in New
  > England the parts of New York and Pennsylvania settled by New Englanders.
  > (Woodard 127)

---

  > On the last leg of their journey, they constructed a flotilla of boats to float
  > down the Ohio and named the flagship the _Mayflower of the West_. Similarly,
  > before settling out to found Vermontville, Michigan, ten families in Addison
  > County, Vermont, joined their Congregational minister in drawing up and signing
  > a written constitution loosely modeled on the Mayflower Compact. (Woodard 176)

But wait, weren't most Yankees Puritan descendants, not Pilgrim descendants?

---

  > Larger wealthier, and more sophisticated than its Deep Southern neighbor,
  > Tidewater had spoken for "the South" on the national stage. Coming from a
  > society that idealized the enlightened rural English gentry, the Tidewater
  > elite expressed regret at the existence of slavery and looked forward to its
  > gradual disappearance. (Woodard 200)

Woodard doesn't explain why Tidewater wanted to get rid of slavery, though
there's potentially an implicit assumption that their idealization of the
enlightened means they were smarter and therefore recognized it as bad. This is
problematic in that it projects modern standards of morality onto past
societies. Fischer provides a better explanation of why Tidewater disliked
slavery: because it inflated the pride of the masters (see "Virginia Rank Ways",
_Albion's Seed_).

---

  > Seen through the lens of the continent's ethnoregional nations, the parties'
  > motivations, allegiances, and behaviors become clearer. One one side was the
  > Deep South and its satellite, Tidewater; on the other, Yankeedom. (Woodard
  > 224)
 
Yet pure ethnoregional loyalty does not fully explain allegiances in the Civil
War:
 
  > The attack on Sumter pushed the Appalachian majority in Pennsylvania,
  > Missouri, Indiana, and western Virginia into the Union camp. Other parts of
  > Appalachia rallied to the Confederacy, regarding Lincoln's call for troops
  > as a direct attack on their communities. (Woodard 238)
  
---
 
  > In Appalachia, however, such rigid hierarchies [as in the Deep South] had
  > never existed, and free blacks initially had more room to maneuver.
  > Ironically this relative social dynamism triggered a particularly gruesome
  > counterattack in the borderlands. Appalachia's staggering poverty—made worse
  > by war and economic dislocation—created a situation in which many white
  > Borderlanders found themselves in direct competition with newly freed
  > blacks, who tended to be less deferential than those in the lowlands. The
  > response was the creation of a secret society of homicidal vigilantes called
  > the Ku Klux Klan. (Woodard 266)

Were free blacks actually in competition with free whites, or was this just a
perception amplified by the region's famous xenophobia? Again, empirical
indicators and primary sources would help here.

## Appendix B: To First Nation, with love, by Colin Woodard

  > First Nation is a highly communalistic society. Most tribal land in the far
  > north is owned in common under a form of title that prevents it from ever
  > being sold to an individual or exploited in such a way that diminishes its
  > value to future generations. In Greenland there is no private property at
  > all: everyone is allowed to responsibly use the people's shared land, but it
  > is thought the height of absurdity that any one person should "own" it,
  > which would be comparable to someone's asserting ownership of the wind.
  > Inuit—whether dwelling in Labrador, Nunavut, Greenland, or Alaska—still
  > hunt, fish, and gather a substantial amount of their food, and all of those
  > "home foods" and the implements associated with them are generally regarded
  > as common property as well. If a hunter kills a seal, it's handed over to
  > whoever needs it. Villages have communal freezers that anyone can
  > access—free of charge or accounting—because food cannot belong to one
  > person. If the tribe engages in an industrial enterprise, the proceeds
  > belong to everyone.
  > 
  > Not surprisingly, First Nation has an extremely strong environment ethic. In
  > Canada—where a revolutionary 1999 supreme court decision recognized Indian
  > oral histories as legitimate evidence in establishing precolonial
  > territories—aboriginal people are setting the terms by which oil, gas,
  > mining, and timber companies have to abide. the 2,000-person Innu nation in
  > Labrador has created a top-notch, ecosystem-based forestry management plan
  > for their ancestral lands in Labrador, which at 17.5 million acres, are
  > larger than West Virginia. They hired professional forest ecologists to
  > identify areas that shouldn't be cut for the good of wildlife and water
  > quality and added their own hunting, fishing, and trapping grounds. In the
  > end, 60 percent of their territory was placed off-limits to loggers; the
  > rest is sustainably harvested for the good of the collective nation. Similar
  > interventions have resulted in a 57.6-million-acre forestry plan for Kaska
  > lands in northern British Columbia and the Yukon and a new national park and
  > wildlife refuge in the Northwest Territories that is eleven times the size
  > of Yellowstone. "There's a new game in town where First Nations are driving
  > outcomes across the board and trying to achieve a balance between their
  > land, history, the modern economy, and the future," says Larry Innes, who
  > has worked with tribes across the Canadian north as director of the Canadian
  > Boreal Initiative, an environment initiative financed by the Pew Charitable
  > Trusts. "Canada is really one of the last, best places where we can get the
  > balance right."
  > 
  > In both Canada and Greenland the Inuit have been at the forefront of the
  > climate change battle, as warmer temperatures are already disrupting their
  > way of life. In Ilulissat and other northern Greenland settlements, hunters
  > are reluctantly giving up their sled dog teams because sea ice no longer
  > forms in winter. (You can't travel by "land" in Greenland because rugged
  > mountains and mile-tall glacier fronts block every route.) Alaskan villages
  > have already had to be moved to escape the advancing sea and melting
  > permafrost. Polar bears and other game are vanishing. Meanwhile drug abuse,
  > alcoholism, and teen suicide have become endemic. "In one lifetime, our way
  > of life has been transformed," says Sheila Watt-Cloutier of Nunavut, whose
  > climate change work as chair of the Inuit Circumpolar Council earned her a
  > 2007 Nobel Peace Prize nomination. "We've been seeing the breakdown of our
  > society."
  > 
  > Greenlanders, for one, have decided the best way to move forward is to be
  > masters of their own destiny. In 2009 they achieved a state of
  > near-independence from Denmark following a self-rule referendum supported by
  > 76 percent of voters. Greenlanders now control the criminal justice, social
  > welfare, and health-care systems, land-use planning, fisheries management,
  > and environmental regulations, education, transportation, and even the
  > issuance of offshore oil exploration contracts. "It's a natural thing for a
  > population to run their own country," says the island's foreign minister,
  > Aleqa Hammond. "We don't think like Europeans, we don't look like Europeans,
  > and we're not from Europe. It's not that we have bad feelings about Denmark,
  > but it's a natural thing for a population with its own race and identity to
  > want to cut its strings to foreign rule." Securing independence won't be
  > easy, she admits, given that the country is still dependent on Danish
  > government subsidies to maintain its government, hospitals, and generous
  > social welfare system. But she believes Greenlanders have a secret weapon.
  > "You'll notice here in Greenland that the women are very strong, not only
  > physically strong, but in all respects: in politics, business, education
  > level and everything," she says, adding that roughly half the island's
  > parliament is female. "Our bishop is a woman, most mayors are women and so
  > forth. there's never been a fight for gender equality in Greenland. Women
  > have always been powerful in our society. Our God was a female, and when the
  > Christians came to Greenland [in the eighteenth century] and said 'our God
  > is mighty and great and he looks like us,' our first reaction was: a _He_?
  > Because not only are our women smarter and more pretty than men, they also
  > give birth, they give life, and when there are problems in society, the
  > women are the ones who are fighting to be sure the society survives. The
  > Inuit language has no difference between he or she, or between mankind and
  > animal," she adds. "They are all equal."
  > 
  > Communalistic, environmentally-minded, and female-dominated, the people of
  > First Nation will have a very different approach to the global challenges of
  > the twenty-first century from that of the other nations of the continent and
  > the world. And starting in Greenland, First Nation is building a series of
  > national-states of its own, giving North America's indigenous peoples a
  > chance to show the rest of the world how they would blend post-modern life
  > with premodern folkways. (Woodard 319-321)

[Zagat-style]: https://www.zagat.com/r/saison-san-francisco
[appendix_a]: #appendix-a-more-missing-details-in-american-nations
[appendix_b]: #appendix-b-to-first-nation-with-love-by-colin-woodard
[charles_joyner]: https://www.jstor.org/stable/541094
[darrett_rutman]: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2164202
[igm_school_vouchers]: http://www.igmchicago.org/surveys/school-vouchers
[jonathan_steplyk]: http://personal.tcu.edu/swoodworth/Fischer.htm
[sfpl_albions_seed]: /media/american_nations/sfpl_albions_seed_availability.png
[sfpl_american_nations]: /media/american_nations/sfpl_american_nations_availability.png
[ssc_outgroup]: http://slatestarcodex.com/2014/09/30/i-can-tolerate-anything-except-the-outgroup/
[wiki_bacons_rebellion]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bacon%27s_Rebellion
[wiki_texas_revolution]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Texas_Revolution
[wiki_presentism]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Presentism_(literary_and_historical_analysis)
[woodard_nations_map]: https://4.bp.blogspot.com/-KQ_Qh60WcwA/T4OfimVs9kI/AAAAAAAABSs/1GkxUoOpFRU/s1600/ColinWoodard_AmericanNations_map.JPG

